# Test tables

## What is a test table?

A test table describe a behaviour of a reactive system by 
ensuring allowed input and output values for specific time frames.

## Semantics

A system is conform to a test table if and only if the system response with the corresponding (after the test table) output
sequence given a valid sequence of input values.


## Input format

The test tables are serialized into XML, following the scheme 
of [`exteta-1.0.xsd`]().
The XML contains three parts under the root element. 

### `<variables>`

These tag contains the two types of variables: 
i/o and constraint. 

#### `<variable>`

**Attributes:**

| Name | Description   |
|------|---------------|
| identifier | variable identifier |
| io   | `input` or  `output` |
| data-type | IEC61131-3 builtin datatype. Currently supported: AnyInt and AnyBit | 


* I/O variables talk about the the input and output variables of the given program.

#### `<constraint>`

Constraint variables (*specification variable*) 
are not visible to the program.

**Attributes:**

| Name | Description   |
|------|---------------|
| identifier | variable identifier |
| constraint   | a valid cell expression |
| data-type | IEC61131-3 builtin datatype. Currently supported: AnyInt and AnyBit | 



### `<steps>`

### `<region>` and `<step>`
The `<steps>` tag contains the row (`<step>`) of the test tables.
Each row the value of the cells (cell expressions) in the order of the defined i/o variables.

You repeat a bunch of steps, by wrapping them into a region block. 

A region and step tag has the `duration` attribute, which defines how often the step is applied.
The `duration` is an interval `[m,n]` with constant values for `m,n`. 
 

### Cell Expression (`<cell>`)

Formally, a cell expression is generated by the [grammar]().
Informally, a cell expression is a boolean expression over the following operators 

* arithmetic `+, -, *, /`
* logical `and, or, xor`. 
 
The syntax and semantic, e.g. the operator precedence is 
tight on the definition of Structured Text and SMV (nuXmv).
For example, `OR` and `|` is allowed for logical or.

Additionally, we introduce abbreviations.

* Constants
  
  A simple constant means the equivalence with this value.
  
  `5` means `X = 5` and `FALSE` is `NOT X`.

* Single-sided comparison

  A construct with a relational operator, `<,<=,<>,=, >=, >`, 
  compares the column variable `X` with the given expression.
  
  Example: `<1` means `X<1` resp. `>=a+2` expands to `X>=a+2`.
 
* Interval

  You can specify an interval `[m,n]` to enforce a 
  lower and upper bound for `X`: `m<=X & X>=n`.
   
  Example: `[x+2, x+4]` means `(x+2) <= X <= (x+4)`.

* Don't-Care

  If you don't want to force a value, you can use "don't-care" `-`.

#### Operators with Precedence

0. constants and variable names
1. parens `()` and unary operators `! NOT -`
2. point operators `MOD % / *`
3. Substraction and Addition `+ -`
4. Comparision `< <= >= >`
5. equality
6. antivalence
7. logical and `& AND`
8. logical or  `| OR`
9. logical xor `xor XOR`


#### `<options>`

Options are key-value pairs of the kind `<option key="" value=""/>`. 
They give additional information for the processing of the given table. 

Currently allowed options:

##### Program mode

* Key: `mode`
* Values: `CONFORMANCE` or `CONCRETE_TABLE` or `INPUT_SEQUENCE_EXISTS` | Controls 

The mode of test tables has following effect:

* `CONFORMANCE` - **default**
    Checks the system conformity against the test table.
    Returns a counter example, iff the system is not compilant against the above semantic.
* `CONCRETE_TABLE` 
    Returns a counter example, that represents a concrete run through the test table. 
* `INPUT_SEQUENCE_EXISTS` 
    The above semantics has one problem, if no possible *input sequence extension* exists. 
    This mode checks if there exists always an input extension.

##### Cycles through the steps

In dependence of `mode = CONCRETE_TABLE` you can
give the wanted cycle count for each step. 

* Keys: `cycles.<id>`
* Value: `int`

where `<id>` is the number of the region/step 
(starting with zero, in order of appearance). 


##### Data types 

You can select the bit width of the ST data types. **currently not implemented**

#### `<functions>`

Between this tag you can define arbitrary function as Structured Text code. 
These function are usable within the cell expressions as regular function calls.